Hi there.
This is De La Rue.
And welcome back.
Let's now continue our discussion on interfaces as there are few more important details which we need
to discuss.
Like a class, an interface can also extend another interface.
We know that by extending a class we are creating a specialized class and the specialized class typically
adds new variables and methods on top of what it inherits.
Similarly, a sub interface also adds some specialized abstract methods.
And of course, they can also add one or more static final variables to.
The example shown here is from the Java API where the interface list extends the interface collection.
Both these interfaces are part of the Java package and we will discuss them in detail and Collections
Framework chapter.
Note that a class implementing the sub interface has to implement all abstract methods declared in both
the sub as well as the super interfaces.
There is a class called ArrayList and it implements the list interface that we see here.
So it implements abstract methods from both list as well as the collection interfaces.
ArrayList, which is very important, will also be discussed later in Collections Framework Chapter.
One other thing to note is that a class can only implement an interface.
It cannot extend an interface.
It can only extend another class.
So a class can extend another class and an interface can extend another interface, thus creating more
specialized versions.
However, unlike classes, an interface can extend multiple interfaces.
Here is another example from the Java API where an interface is extending to interfaces and this helps
in adding new methods that are appropriate to the combination.
What that means is each of the super interfaces specify their own unique capabilities, but the sub
interface would provide methods that represent capabilities of both the super interfaces.
And this is not commonly encountered.
But when such a flexibility is needed, interfaces serve the purpose.
Now when discussing abstract classes, we said that an abstract subclass need not override abstract
methods defined in a superclass.
And the same applies if an abstract subclass implements an interface, it need not implement any abstract
methods declared in the interface.
They can be done by subclasses of the Abstract Subclass.
So just keep in mind that an abstract class can also implement an interface.
It need not be just a normal concrete class can be an abstract class to.
And here is an example where we have two interfaces A and B, both declaring an identical abstract method
named for Class X, which implements both these interfaces, provides an implementation for the method.
For now, recall that earlier, when we have something similar, we had the issue of diamond problem.
However, there it was due to multiple inheritance of identical method implementations.
But here it is multiple inheritance of only identical method declarations which do not include method
implementations and the subclass is forced to provide the method implementation.
So we will not have the issue of diamond problem in this case.
And here is an interesting scenario.
As in the previous example, interface A declares the abstract method full.
Now let's assume B is a completely independent class that provides a method definition for foo.
That is, foo is a concrete method in class B.
In that case, the subclass X, which implements the interface A and extends the Class B does not have
to provide an implementation for the abstract method foo in the interface.
The method foo defined and B would be sufficient unless class x wants to override it.
Now let's discuss a bit on interface variables.
Let's first see why variables and interfaces must be static and final.
They have to be static because as mentioned earlier, interfaces are non interchangeable.
That is, they are stateless.
So the variables would have to be accessed by qualifying the variable names with the interface name.
That is the interface name followed by the dot, which is followed by the variable name.
And they have to be final as interfaces are pure contracts.
And with that, they are making a hard statement that what we see defined inside them will remain so
forever.
So it is like an agreement that is set in stone and hence will not change.
So if there is a variable with a certain value, then that value will not change.
And so other classes can access that variable, assuming that it will always remain the same.
For instance, let's assume that we have such an interface named connection that declares a variable
named success, which is initialized to the value 25.
Then let's say we have a class named client, and let's assume that there is some logic where the client
connects to some remote server, and if it connects successfully, it returns a status code of success.
So for that, it may use the success variable in the interface connection.
So this class client would be expecting that the value of success will always remain as 25 as there
may be some other code that would use this value that the class client is returning.
Now, if the value of success variable is changed, then it would be a breach of contract.
So with success being declared as final, we have that assurance that it will never change.
Moreover, note that here, since success is a constant value, we know that the value 25 that success
is initialized with will be copied into the return statement in the class client.
That is, the compiler will copy that value into the bytecode of the class client.
Finally, let's look at accessing identically named variables from two different super types.
So here we have two interfaces A and B, both of which define a variable called well.
No Class X implements both A and B.
And as you can see, if Class X accesses variable vowel with its simple name, we get a compiler error
as compiler obviously does not know which version of value to use.
So there is a variable naming class here and as shown in the next statement, we need to qualify the
constant well to fix the ambiguity.
In this case, we are accessing the version in B.
But only if one of these interfaces is declaring the variable, well then x can access it directly.
Also notice that the variable VAL is an all caps as we know that by convention static final variables
are all caps separated by underscores.
So don't forget the naming convention.
So that's about it.
Next, we will do a demo of interfaces, after which we will discuss interfaces more conceptually so
that we know when to use them.
And that's the most important part.
Thank you.